Testing, testing, one, two, three, four, one, two, three.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
This is a bright sunny Wednesday, March the 7th.
I'm at 906 North Avenue in Bryan.
I have the pleasure and honor of chatting with Professor Frank Pierce.
To introduce yourself to anyone who might hear this tape or read the transcription,
Describe where he grew up, went to high school, college.
Describe Frank Pierce before joining the faculty at Texas A&M.
Go as long as you'd like.
Well, I was born in Edwardsville, Illinois, which is about 20 miles from St.
Louis, Missouri.
And I grew up there and had the advantages of a small bedroom community, as it was called, and the advantages of going to St.
Louis for all manner of musical and theatrical programs and for doctors and shopping, things of that nature.
I attended the Edwardsville High School.
I was interested in a great many things.
music, art, drama.
I was in the band and the orchestra and drum major from the time I was in junior high school to the time I graduated in the band.
I went to the University of Illinois
where I started out in architecture and hoping to be a theatrical designer.
But then my eyes gave out on me from the intensive rendering I had to do.
And so I then decided to change majors.
And I considered mathematics, which was always an easy subject for me up until the time I hit analytical geometry.
And then if it hadn't been that my brother was teaching at the University of Illinois in the electrical engineering department, and my
roommate that semester, I would have never pulled through.
He wouldn't work my problems for me, but he would ask me one question that I could answer, and then he would ask me the next harder question and make me reason between them.
And so I finally forgot about
mathematics and ended up in speech with a minor in English.
Then I discovered that I had a speech defect from a fall.
when I was three years old going down the stairs on my kiddie car.
It had damaged my hearing in my right ear and caused me a partial paralysis of the right side of the face.
My tongue moved at different speeds, so I had to learn how to pronounce the S sound because I didn't pronounce that properly.
Then I went home after I graduated and told my father I was going to get a job, and he said, no, you're going to get a master's degree.
Your brother got a master's degree, and you're going to get a master's degree.
What was your father's occupation?
He did many things.
He was the closest thing to a genius that I ever met.
and he could take things apart and put them back together again.
He could do anything with his hands.
My brother took after him.
He was self-educated, and I never saw the man sit down with—out picking up a book or a newspaper or a magazine.
and he had educated himself.
When my interests took a different direction from his, he tried to read about the things I was interested in so he would know me better.
So when I came home and said I was going to get a job after my bachelor's degree, he said, no, you're going to go back to school.
He said, I don't care where you go.
I don't care what you take.
I'll pay for it.
I said, all right, I'll go to Yale, study under George Pierce Baker, take two years, cost $4,000.
This was at the end of the Depression.
He said, all right, I'll borrow the money and send you.
I said, if you're going to be that big a damn fool, I'll go where you can afford to send me.
We visited a number of schools and universities in the Midwest, and I ended up at the State University of Iowa that had a good theater arts department.
I graduated in February of 1942.
During, of course, the previous December, Pearl Harbor happened.
My roommate and I tried to enlist in the V-12 Navy program.
I was denied because of my eyesight and allergies.
He was denied because he was 6'6", which was unusual in those days.
There weren't many people who were 6'6".
Both of us were later drafted.
We couldn't get in, but we were drafted.
After I graduated, I came home and taught one semester.
I taught theater arts in the Edwardville High School.
That summer I was drafted.
The draft board doctor whom I knew personally said, they'll draft you after women and children.
And then one day walking down the street from across the street, he waved at me and said, hey, Pierce, forget everything I ever said.
And so I was drafted shortly thereafter.
Spent three and a half years in the Army, 10 months overseas in England.
I was about to be sent.
over to France during the Battle of the Bulge during that period.
And they took away my GI trousers and gave me limey trousers.
They took away my GI blanket and gave me a horse blanket.
And then they were going to take me and send me over as a medic.
And I knew nothing about being a medic.
I said, well, I'll have to carry my typewriter with me.
And the week before I was to go, why the war ended in
And we, our medical hospital I was in, was immediately shipped back to the States to be retrained to go to the South Pacific.
And a week before we were to embark for the South Pacific, the war ended with Japan.
And so all of us had too many points to be shipped over, and we were kept in the States.
And I was discharged six months later.
I got out of the Army about February 5, 1946.
I took a couple of weeks getting home, stopped off to visit my college roommate who had been discharged earlier.
And then got home on the 13th of February.
On the 14th, I rested.
On the morning of the 15th, I was paid $5 to proctor a Pepsi-Cola scholarship.
I got home at noon and there was a notice from the University of Illinois that there was a job at Texas A&M.
I had written a month before I was discharged to Dr. Williams in the placement office at Illinois, whom I knew personally, being a friend of his son's, and I had written him get me a job at some college or university.
So I have this notice at noon, and it said the job started on the 18th, and this was the 15th.
And so...
I said, well, I better send them a special delivery air mail letter telling them I'm interested.
And my father said, why don't you wire?
And my mother, who was a common sense member of the family, said, why don't you phone?
So I phoned Dr. Thomas F. Mayo, who was the head of the department.
He said that he was very interested in what I told him, and as soon as he got my resume from the University of Illinois, he would let me know.
Well, he got it that afternoon, and the next morning I had a telegram offering me a job for nine months at $225 a month.
Beginning right then.
And as an instructor.
And so I flew down on a Sunday.
I got into Houston and it started raining.
I took a bus up to College Station.
On the way up, I saw a young man across the aisle.
He was reading a math book, and I said, would you mind telling me if you go to A&M?
He said, yes, I do.
I said, would you mind telling me something about A&M?
I know nothing about it.
He said, it's the best damn men's military college in the nation.
That was my introduction.
That was the last thing I wanted to see after three and a half years in the Army was more men in uniform.
My vision of teaching was a young girl on the front row with her legs crossed.
And that was denied.
When I got to A&M, the blackout was still in effect from the war.
Campus was raining.
It was pitch black.
I stepped off at the bus station, which looked like a four-holder privy.
And it was over Eastgate then?
Yeah.
And it was—no, it was Northgate.
Oh, Northgate.
Northgate.
It was probably where Kinko's, in that area, was.
It was just a shack and you stepped off into mud.
They had this twisted green wire with a dirty bulb on the end of it and that was the lighting.
I took one look and I was about to step back on the bus and leave when they pulled out.
I called Dr. Mayo and he said, I have a room for you at Aggieland Inn.
The fellow at the bus station said he drove a taxi.
I said, can you drive me to the Aggieland Inn?
He said, yes.
And about two blocks I was at the Aggieland Inn.
And the next day I— Describe it in those days.
I don't have a good description.
Aggieland Inn, it was a very attractive sort of brick building with
sort of a Spanish influence to it.
And one segment was glassed for eating, dining.
They had a coffee shop.
about how many guest rooms?
Well, there was, I think, three or four floors, I would say, probably about, just a rough estimate, about 30 or 40 at the most.
And it was west of the Northgate?
It was across from Cebiza.
Across from Cebiza.
And there was a hospital, a nurse's unit behind it.
or to one side, and then there was the President's Home, that huge clapboard structure.
And Spies Hall was right across from it.
And what belongings did you bring on that plane trip?
Well, I had the Gladstone bag, which I had gotten when I graduated from high school.
My brother got a Gladstone bag when he graduated, and four years later, I got a Gladstone bag when I graduated.
And so that's what I had.
And I had a covert cloth suit.
And when I got out the next day wearing my covert cloth suit, it was February the 18th, and it was pouring down rain again.
The water was level with the gutters.
And I was wearing my Army raincoat, and I was sweating more from the covert cloth suit and the raincoat than I got wet from the rain.
And I walked over to the academic building where the English department was on the third floor.
And Dr. Mayall greeted me and said, do you see the corner of the desk here?
I said, yes, sir.
He said, that's your desk.
He said, we don't have office space for you at the moment.
He said, you are Mr. X. Mr. Y and Mr. Z are yet to come.
This was the third week, the beginning of the third week of the semester.
During that telephone conversation with him before he hired you,
Did he ask you any, as you recall, did he ask you any questions?
No, not really.
I told him I had a bachelor's degree from the University of Illinois and a master's degree from the State University of Iowa, or from the University of Iowa.
And we had, I think, two people who had graduated from Iowa.
and before him, before the war, a fellow by the name of Bill Owens, who was a very fine writer.
And he came back to A&M for a semester or a year after the war, a little later than I did, but I was Mr. X. How did you learn what your duties would be?
what you would be teaching and so forth.
I learned that very quickly.
He said, here is your schedule.
You have 15 hours of class.
You have three sections of first semester freshman English and two sections of second semester freshman English.
You have 135 students.
Your next
Your colleagues have been taking your classes for two weeks, and they will give you all the help that you will need.
And he said, now, Dr. Greer has been teaching your first class, and if you'll go down the hall, and he gave me the office number, he'll help you.
I went down in the hall to Dr. Greer, a very dear war man, who said, I need to take my medicine.
I had my heart stopped a while back.
Dr. Greer said, I'm glad to see you.
Here are two sets of ungraded papers for you to grade.
Your next class is 10 minutes from now in the electrical engineering building."
And he told me where that was.
And he said, you'll just have time to make it.
And that was the kind of help I got.
I went over to class and saw it was largely composed of veterans.
A&M had experienced a tremendous increase that semester from veterans under the GI Bill.
A lot of them had been former students who had flunked out and who had returned and were readmitted.
And many of them ended up being A and B students because they had gained what they needed, which was maturity.
Some of them are married, had families, and they had a responsibility and a need for education, and they buckled down and worked.
And so I said to the class, I said, well,
I'm two weeks behind you, so you're going to have to educate me and tell me what you've been doing.
Hopefully, I will catch up with you by the time the semester is over."
But I ended up that day with 270 ungraded papers.
And five sections of class to teach, two preparations, and English was a minor.
And all my English was in literature and in writing, creative writing.
So I knew absolutely nothing.
I wrote well because I had read well growing up.
My mother had a talent for writing letters, usually poison pen letters.
And I was usually the object of her poison pen.
But she had a talent for writing and for description things, so I inherited from her.
And across the street was this woman.
who had been a high school English teacher.
And so she read to the children of the neighborhood every afternoon of summer in this wonderful, big, dramatic voice.
And she was like a second mother to me.
And so she would take me down to the library with her children and make me check out eight books at first.
And then after that, she didn't have to make me because
I grew to love literature, and my parents always gave me what I needed and most of what I wanted.
And so I had a great, great many books bought for me that I liked over the years.
They spent a fortune on me in the things that I, my interest.
And as long as they saw I was interested why they supported that.
So my interest in English was mostly in reading.
And so having read well for a great many years, I wrote well.
And I'd always been interested in writing.
And I'd written stories and written for Quill and Inkhorn in junior high school and so on.
So I never really learned punctuation, spelling, grammar.
So I wrote well, but I didn't know the things I needed to teach.
And so I asked around and found out who was the best teacher of the basics of English.
And fortunately, he was in the next office to mine.
And I wore a path between his office and mine.
And he was an excellent teacher.
His name was Fred Eckfeldt.
He was from Iowa.
That's E-K-F-E-L-T.
E-K-F-E-L-T.
And he was really a very brilliant man, one of the few doctors in the department.
About how many were in the faculty in English when you arrived?
Well, I was number 26, Mr. X, 27 and 28 were yet to come.
They arrived a week later.
And this was really English and speech?
This was an umbrella department.
Dr. Summey, who was retired but still there, and Dr. Mayo, I think between them had decided that whatever the other departments in the college did not teach, English would teach.
And so we ended up with
everything in an umbrella.
And so you learned over the years to teach a great variety of things.
One time we had two sections in English.
One was you went two hours and got one hour credit.
One you went three hours and got two hours credit.
We had a course in playwriting, radio writing, which was taught originally by Harry Kidd.
We had oral interpretation.
And we had a course in creative writing that was taught by John Paul Abbott.
And we had later folklore and dramatic arts.
And we taught logic because there was no logic taught on the campus.
When I left years later, there were four different logic
Of course, it taught over the university.
Most of the people were illogical, I discovered.
Actually, we taught a great many things, and a lot of these have broken off into separate departments.
As you are getting settled that spring semester of 46, where did you end up finding a place to live?
I lived in the YMCA.
The top floor of the YMCA consisted of a series of about eight or ten rooms, some of them single, some of them holding four people.
And I lived at the Y until September of 1947 when I got married.
And ate at Cebesa.
And I ate at either the Aggieland Inn or Cebisa or we went into town to Hotar's in downtown Bryan or places like that.
But then there were Pop Wiley's and a number of other places where you could eat.
And some of the drugstores served food.
All right.
And did you have a private room in Hawaii?
I had a private room in Hawaii.
Remember what the rent was?
You know, I was very, very, very modest because— It was entirely furnished, including linens and— Well, yeah, it was furnished, and I don't remember whether we made our own beds or what, but being in the Army meant nothing to make my own bed.
Send the laundry home to mother and the laundry bag.
Actually, I had my old laundry bag.
I guess I bought that home sometime and I had a black lady who did my laundry for me.
every two weeks.
Describe, if you please, your, you said many of these students were veterans.
Describe the first year or so, the students and their zeal, their determination.
Well, the first thing I learned about A&M was it was core-oriented, of course.
And everybody whipped out and introduced himself.
And the four teachers were walking together down the street, and they were approached by an Aggie.
He would say, howdy, howdy, howdy, howdy.
Everybody got his own howdy.
That delighted me.
I remember the first time I went back to Illinois after having been some months at A&M.
I went down the street saying howdy to everybody and they gave me weird looks.
Who was this character?
Unfortunately, we're not always the best.
The regular corps members, of course, had a tremendous amount of corps business, and I put that in quotation marks, hazing, that they had to put up with.
And they went to Yale practice.
And I remember during one period during the first year or two when they even had yell practices that went on at 2 o'clock in the morning.
And I couldn't figure out what they were unhappy about.
And so I finally asked one of my students.
I said, all right, I can't get a straight answer.
So I'm making you president of Texas A&M.
I'm saying, now what is the first thing you're going to do as president?
He says, I'm going to fire the football coach and get a new coach.
And that was one of my introductions to the fact that football was king at A&M and that winning football season was all important.
And I went to class one day and I called the row and I said, where is this man?
And he said, Mr. Pierce, he's in California.
And I said, what's he doing in California?
Mr. Pierce, he's the captain of the football team.
So I went down the line and I called, where's this man?
He's in California, I said.
He football player?
Mr. Pierce, he's the head of Yale leader.
And after that, I got a reputation of being anti-athletic.
And so when they had the little gray man, I never did learn his name, but he would actually hold the hands of one or two football players at registration and walk up to the registration desk.
Who is teaching this course?
Frank Pierce.
We don't want him.
Who else is teaching it?
Nolan Shepherd.
That's the one.
Nolan was a Billy Lyons Phelps.
of A&M, he never saw a football player he didn't like.
And so I once suggested that we do away with teaching during the fall semester and just play football and then start teaching in the spring, but nobody took that suggestion to heart.
In those first semesters, how did the veterans
as students?
How did the veterans mesh with the true freshmen?
Well, everybody seemed to get along.
I mean, it was a very friendly campus and it was easy to meet people at A&M and especially somewhat
While it was still a relatively small school, you were thrown together with people from different departments and it was easy enough to know everybody from the president on down.
Who were some of your first true friends?
Well, one was another bachelor by the name of Lloyd Keel.
And at that time, there was very little to do in the community and so it was
The accepted thing for bachelors especially to call on their colleagues on Sunday.
And so Lloyd and I would start out about 11 o'clock in the morning and we would spend the day visiting our colleagues and drinking coffee.
Of course, my kidneys were in better shape in those days than they are today.
I remember one time we ended up at the Summey's, and Dr. Summey was a very short-spoken small man.
And I learned, to my surprise, that he was the authority on American punctuation, which is what he did his work on at Columbia University.
And his dissertation was the Bible as far as American punctuation was concerned.
And just one story about him quickly.
And we're glad to have all the stories.
One story about him quickly.
I discovered that when you have a series like red, white, and blue, and you put a comma after the red and after the white before the and, that you could omit the comma before the and.
And so I was writing a story, and so I went and saw Dr. Summey in the hall.